---
title: CloudEvents SQL Reached V1!
description: Announcing version 1 of CloudEvents SQL!
draft: false
date: 2024-07-55
author:
  name: Calum Murray
---
# Announcing CloudEvents SQL V1.0

It’s my pleasure to announce that the CloudEvents community has released 
version 1.0 of the CloudEvents SQL (CESQL) specification, along with 
implementations into SDKs for both [Golang](https://github.com/cloudevents/sdk-go)
and [Java](https://github.com/cloudevents/sdk-java). This is a result of 3 
years of work in the CloudEvents community, and builds on top of the already
released CloudEvents v1.0 specification, making it easier for developers to
generate and manage events flowing through their infrastructure.

## Overview of CloudEvents


[CloudEvents](http://cloudevents.io) is a CNCF Graduated project that, at its
core, defines a common set of metadata that most events already have, as well
as how that metadata should be represented in the serialization of those
events. CloudEvents aims to augment existing eventing flows by leveraging
preexisting transport-level extensibility points. This is a really powerful
concept, as it leads to strong interoperability between different eventing
systems, whether they are providing, consuming, routing, transforming or
otherwise interacting with the events and even in many cases, even if they are
not aware of CloudEvents.

For a CloudEvents specification to be approved, it must pass a majority vote
from the eligible voters in the project. Voters become eligible by attending 3
of the previous 4 weekly meetings, and each company only gets a single vote.
The CESQL v1 vote passed with 100% approval, and one eligible voter abstaining.
Additionally, there were 4 non-eligible voters who voted yes and one who
abstained.

## CESQL: What is it and why do we have it now?

A primary goal of the core CloudEvents specification is to allow event
middleware to not worry about the various formats being used in the events it
is processing. Building on that concept, CESQL allows middleware to
programmatically examine events based on CloudEvents metadata without worrying
about how to access the metadata on events, and instead worry about what the
middleware wants to do with the events it is processing. In this way, CESQL
is a natural extension on top of the original CloudEvents specification.

This is best explained by Doug Davis (Chair CNCF Serverless WG/CloudEvents;
Microsoft):

> The CloudEvents specification was the first step in our journey to address
some of the pain-points the community was experiencing with managing the vast
amount of events in today's distributed systems. CloudEvents focuses on the
high-level concept of making key eventing metadata easily accessible without
the need to understand, or even look at, the actual event payload itself. Thus
enabling middleware to operate in a much more loosely-couple manner. With that
core concept in place, one of the next logical area to focus on was the
mechanism by which developers could express their event routing decisions based
on that metadata. CESQL exactly fits that need. With CESQL, developers can
express, in an interoperable SQL-like syntax, the criteria for when events meet
certain requirement such that further actions should be taken. Freeing
middleware managers (devs) from needing to understand the format, and even
content, of each type of event flowing through the system. I'm very excited to
see how the broader eventing and cloud native communities leverage this new
specification, as the Knative community has already done.

To answer why an SQL based language was chosen instead of some other type of 
language, Francisco Guardini (slinkydeveloper on GitHub; Restate) said that:

> we were looking for a language that:
- is vendor neutral
- is easy enough to implement with a parser generator and a simple recursive
expression evaluator
- not turing complete (for security reasons)
- could work out of the box with databases (that's mainly the reason for it to
be a subset of sql expressions)

He went on to say:
> The language went through a couple of iterations/ideas, initially it looked 
closer to a subset of C-like expressions (more javascript-ish), but this 
couldn't clearly work for database folks, and that's why we switched it to 
SQL-like.

The result of this initial work from Francisco Guardini was CESQL: an SQL-like
language that provides a simple and consistent way for middleware and event
processors to interact with CloudEvents.

## Examples

With this basic understanding of why CESQL exists and what it is trying to do,
let’s take a look at some sample expressions!

The simplest expression in CESQL is to address an attribute from a CloudEvent.
For example, if you wanted to retrieve the id of an event all you would need to
write is:

```sql
id
```

However, given that many of the CloudEvent attributes are optional (in
particular, all of the “extension” attributes) you may want to use CESQL to
check if an attribute exists on the event before you process it. For example,
if you want to check if the subject attribute exists, this can be expressed
really simply as:

```sql
EXISTS subject
```

You can also do comparisons on the values of attributes, and perform the basic
Boolean Algebra operations (AND, OR, XOR). Using this, you can construct more
complex expressions to filter events. For example, if you wanted an event where
firstname or subject is ”Jane” you could write:

```sql
firstname = 'Jane' OR subject = 'Jane'
```

Similar to normal SQL, you can also do wildcard string comparisons. For 
example, if you wanted to check if the `type` of the event begins with github
and ends with success you could express this as:

```sql
type LIKE github%success
```

CESQL also supports function calls, and allows users to provide their own
functions to the engine. As an example, if you wanted to check that firstname
and subject had the same value without worrying about the case sensitivity, you
could use the LOWER function to compare the lowercase values of each attribute:

```sql
LOWER(firstname) = LOWER(subject)
```

There are many more operations and functions supported by CESQL than we can
mention here, so we recommend that you read [the specification](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/cesql/spec.md)
and try out the Golang or Java SDK implementations of CESQL!

## Usage in Event Filtering

As we have attempted to demonstrate with the above examples, one of the primary
use cases for CESQL is in event filtering. It is currently being used for this
within [Knative Eventing](https://knative.dev/docs/eventing/), a CNCF
Incubating Project that provides Event Driven Architecture (EDA) primitives
through Kubernetes Native interfaces. As Pierangelo Di Pilato (Principal 
Software Engineer ; Red Hat), the WG lead for Knative Eventing says:

> As Knative Eventing's user base grew, the need for more expressive event 
filtering became apparent. CESQL addresses this challenge by introducing
efficient SQL-like expressions, leveraging developers' existing knowledge of
SQL for powerful event routing and filtering.

To use a CESQL expression to filter an event in Knative, all you need to do is
create a Trigger resource that defines a CESQL filter:

```yaml
apiVersion: eventing.knative.dev/v1
kind: Trigger
metadata:
  name: my-trigger
spec:
  broker: default-broker
  filters:
    - cesql: "type LIKE github%success"
  subscriber:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: my-deployment
```

To try out the CESQL filters in Knative, you can use the upcoming Knative 1.15
release which will include the CESQL v1 implementation!

We hope that you give CESQL (and hence CloudEvents) a try! If there are any
built in functions you feel we should add, please let us know through GitHub
issues. Additionally, if you are interested in implementing the engine for
CESQL in any of the other SDKs that the cloudevents community.

